8.1 WHAT IS A CELL?
Unicellular organisms are capable of (i) independent existence and
(ii) performing the essential functions of life. Anything less than a complete
structure of a cell does not ensure independent living. Hence, cell is the
fundamental structural and functional unit of all living organisms.
Anton Von Leeuwenhoek first saw and described a live cell. Robert
Brown later discovered the nucleus. The invention of the microscope and
its improvement leading to the electron microscope revealed all the
structural details of the cell.
8.2 CELL THEORY
In 1838, Matthias Schleiden, a German botanist, examined a large number
of plants and observed that all plants are composed of different kinds of
cells which form the tissues of the plant. At about the same time, Theodore
CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE
CHAPTER 8
8.1 What is a Cell?
8.2 Cell Theory
8.3 An Overview of
Cell
8.4 Prokaryotic Cells
8.5 Eukaryotic Cells
2020-21
126 BIOLOGY
Schwann (1839), a British Zoologist, studied different types of animal cells
and reported that cells had a thin outer layer which is today known as the
‘plasma membrane’. He also concluded, based on his studies on plant
tissues, that the presence of cell wall is a unique character of the plant
cells. On the basis of this, Schwann proposed the hypothesis that the bodies
of animals and plants are composed of cells and products of cells.
Schleiden and Schwann together formulated the cell theory. This theory
however, did not explain as to how new cells were formed. Rudolf Virchow
(1855) first explained that cells divided and new cells are formed from
pre-existing cells (Omnis cellula-e cellula). He modified the hypothesis of
Schleiden and Schwann to give the cell theory a final shape. Cell theory
as understood today is:
(i) all living organisms are composed of cells and products of cells.
(ii) all cells arise from pre-existing cells.
8.3 AN OVERVIEW OF CELL
You have earlier observed cells in an onion peel and/or human cheek
cells under the microscope. Let us recollect their structure. The onion cell
which is a typical plant cell, has a distinct cell wall as its outer boundary
and just within it is the cell membrane. The cells of the human cheek
have an outer membrane as the delimiting structure of the cell. Inside
each cell is a dense membrane bound structure called nucleus. This
nucleus contains the chromosomes which in turn contain the genetic
material, DNA. Cells that have membrane bound nuclei are called
eukaryotic whereas cells that lack a membrane bound nucleus are
prokaryotic. In both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, a semi-fluid matrix
called cytoplasm occupies the volume of the cell. The cytoplasm is the
main arena of cellular activities in both the plant and animal cells. Various
chemical reactions occur in it to keep the cell in the ‘living state’.
Besides the nucleus, the eukaryotic cells have other membrane bound
distinct structures called organelles like the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
the golgi complex, lysosomes, mitochondria, microbodies and vacuoles.
The prokaryotic cells lack such membrane bound organelles.
Ribosomes are non-membrane bound organelles found in all cells –
both eukaryotic as well as prokaryotic. Within the cell, ribosomes are
found not only in the cytoplasm but also within the two organelles –
chloroplasts (in plants) and mitochondria and on rough ER.
Animal cells contain another non-membrane bound organelle called
centrosome which helps in cell division.
Cells differ greatly in size, shape and activities (Figure 8.1). For example,
Mycoplasmas, the smallest cells, are only 0.3 μm in length while bacteria
2020-21
CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE 127
Red blood cells
(round and biconcave)
White blood cells
(Branched and long)
Columnar epithelial cells
(amoeboid) (long and narrow)
Nerve cell
Mesophyll cells
(round and oval)
A tracheid
(elongated)
Figure 8.1 Diagram showing different shapes of the cells
could be 3 to 5 μm. The largest isolated single cell is the egg of an ostrich.
Among multicellular organisms, human red blood cells are about 7.0
μm in diameter. Nerve cells are some of the longest cells. Cells also vary
greatly in their shape. They may be disc-like, polygonal, columnar, cuboid,
thread like, or even irregular. The shape of the cell may vary with the
function they perform.
8.4 PROKARYOTIC CELLS
The prokaryotic cells are represented by bacteria, blue-green algae,
mycoplasma and PPLO (Pleuro Pneumonia Like Organisms). They are
generally smaller and multiply more rapidly than the eukaryotic cells
(Figure 8.2). They may vary greatly in shape and size. The four basic
shapes of bacteria are bacillus (rod like), coccus (spherical), vibrio (comma
shaped) and spirillum (spiral).
The organisation of the prokaryotic cell is fundamentally similar even
though prokaryotes exhibit a wide variety of shapes and functions. All
2020-21
128 BIOLOGY
prokaryotes have a cell wall surrounding the
cell membrane except in mycoplasma. The fluid
matrix filling the cell is the cytoplasm. There is
no well-defined nucleus. The genetic material is
basically naked, not enveloped by a nuclear
membrane. In addition to the genomic DNA (the
single chromosome/circular DNA), many
bacteria have small circular DNA outside the
genomic DNA. These smaller DNA are called
plasmids. The plasmid DNA confers certain
unique phenotypic characters to such bacteria.
One such character is resistance to antibiotics.
In higher classes you will learn that this plasmid
DNA is used to monitor bacterial transformation
with foreign DNA. Nuclear membrane is found
in eukaryotes. No organelles, like the ones in
eukaryotes, are found in prokaryotic cells except
for ribosomes. Prokaryotes have something
unique in the form of inclusions. A specialised
differentiated form of cell membrane called mesosome is the characteris